BCT III/II                                                                                     1



                              Artificial Intelligence (AI)
                                   Lab Sheet No: 2


Introduction to First Order Predicate Logic (FOPL)
The use of symbolic logic to represent knowledge is not new in that it predates the modern
computer by a number of decades. Even so, the application of logic as a practical means of
representing and manipulating knowledge was not demonstrated until the early 1960s. Today
First Order Predicate Logic (FOPL) or predicate calculus has assumed one of the important roles
in AI for representing the knowledge.

The understanding of FOPL for AI student has several benefits. One, logic offers the formal
approach to reasoning that has a sound theoretical foundation. Next, the structure of FOPL is
flexible enough to permit the accurate representation of the natural language reasonably well.

1. The predicates of FOPL have precisely the same syntactic structure as they have in Prolog -
   i.e. a predicate name with terms as arguments, each term being a

-constant,

-variable, or

-funcion with term(s) as argument(s).

2. Variables must be quantified by either
      " (Universal Quantifier) meaning "for all" or
      $ (Existential Quantifier) meaning "there exists"

e.g $ x P(x) means "some unspecified constant has property P". Each quantifier has a SCOPE
which is defined as the textual area in which it binds occurrences of its variable. This scope is
usually delimited by brackets, unless it is obvious as in the example above.

These extensions critically extend the expressive power of logic. Consider the following
sentences which are given a natural corresponding syntax in predicate calculus:

Natural Language                        Predicate

John is the brother of Jim.             brother_of(john,jim).

Socrates is dead and buried.            dead(socrates)&buried(socrates).
BCT III/II                                                                                           2



All men are mortal.                      "x(Man(x) Þ Mortal(x))

Ram loves all animals.                   "xAnimals(x) Þ Loves(ram, x)

Poppy is a dog.                          Dog (Poppy )
Grandparent is a parent of one’s         x, yGrandparent ( x, y)  zParent ( x, z )  Parent ( z, y)
parent
Parent and child are inverse relation.   x, yParent ( x, y)  Child ( y, x)



Rules combine facts to increase knowledge of the system
       son(X,Y):-
               male(X),child(X).
       X is a son of Y if X is male and X is a child of Y.


Program 1:Write the following statements in FOPL form and by converting them into prolog
program test the given goal.

   1. Every American who sells weapons to hostile nations is a criminal.

   2. Every enemy of America is a hostile.

   3. Iraque has some missiles.

   4. All missiles of Iraque were sold by George.

   5. George is an American.

   6. Iraque is a country.

   7. Iraque is the enemy of America.

   8. Missiles are weapens.



PROGRAM

PREDICATES
hostile(STRING)
enemy_of_america(STRING)
american(STRING)
criminal(STRING)
BCT III/II                                                                                    3



sells_missiles(STRING, STRING)
has_missile(STRING)
country(STRING)


CLAUSES
criminal(X):-
       american(X), sells_missiles(X, Y), hostile(Y).
enemy_of_america(X) :-
       hostile(X).
enemy_of_america("Iraq").


hostile(X):-
       country(X).
has_missile("Iraq").
sells_missiles("George", "Iraq").
american("George").
country("Iraq").


GOAL
criminal("George").



Program 2:Monkey- Banana Problem
Monkey-Banana Problem is the famous problem in AI. Where there is a room containing a
monkey, a chair, and bananas that have been hung from the center of the ceiling of the room; out
of reach from monkey. If the monkey is cleaver enough, he can reach the bananas by placing the
chair directly below the bananas and climbing on the top of the chair.

Now the problem is to use FOPL to represent this monkey-banana problem and prove that
monkey can reach the bananas.

The program is given below. Before running the program, think carefully what are the essential
objects of the problem and how should them be arranged in predicate logic.

PREDICATES
in_room(symbol)
BCT III/II                                                                            4



dexterous(symbol)
tall(symbol)
can_move(symbol,symbol,symbol)
can_reach(symbol,symbol)
get_on(symbol,symbol)
can_climb(symbol,symbol)
close(symbol,symbol)
under(symbol,symbol)
can_climb(symbol,symbol)

CLAUSES
in_room(bananas).
in_room(chair).
in_room(monkey).
dexterous(monkey).
tall(chair).
can_move(monkey,chair,bananas).
can_climb(monkey,chair).

can_reach(X,Y):-
     dexterous(X),close(X,Y).

close(X,Z):-
     get_on(X,Y),
     under(Y,Z),
     tall(Y).
get_on(X,Y):-
     can_climb(X,Y).

under(Y,Z):-
     in_room(X),
     in_room(Y),
     in_room(Z),
     can_move(X,Y,Z).

GOAL
can_reach(monkey,appple)


Program 2:Write the following statements in FOPL form and by converting them into prolog
program test the given goal.
BCT III/II                                                                 5



   9. Every American who sells weapons to hostile nations is a criminal.

   10. Every enemy of America is a hostile.

   11. Iraque has some missiles.

   12. All missiles of Iraque were sold by George.

   13. George is an American.

   14. Iraque is a country.

   15. Iraque is the enemy of America.

   16. Missiles are weapens.



PROGRAM

PREDICATES
hostile(STRING)
enemy_of_america(STRING)
american(STRING)
criminal(STRING)
sells_missiles(STRING, STRING)
has_missile(STRING)
country(STRING)


CLAUSES
criminal(X):-
       american(X), sells_missiles(X, Y), hostile(Y).
enemy_of_america(X) :-
       hostile(X).
enemy_of_america("Iraq").


hostile(X):-
       country(X).
has_missile("Iraq").
BCT III/II                                                                               6



sells_missiles("George", "Iraq").
american("George").
country("Iraq").


GOAL
criminal("George").



Assignments: Write the following statements in FOPL form and by converting them into prolog
program test the different goals.

   1. Assume the following facts:

   ● Steve only likes easy courses
   ● Science courses are hard
   ● All the courses in the basket weaving department are easy
   ● BK301 is a basket weaving course
Use resolution to answer the question, "What course would Steve like?"


   2. Write the following statements in FOPL form and by converting them into prolog
      program test the different goals.

   1. Horses are mammals.

   2. An offspring of a horse is a horse.

   3. Bluebeard is a Charlie’s parent.

   4. Offspring and parents are inverse relations.

   5. Every mammal has a parent.

   Now check, is Charlie a horse?

   3. Write the following statements in FOPL form and by converting them into prolog
      program test the different goals.
BCT III/II   7
